# Simulated changes of the Southern Ocean air-sea heat flux feedback in a warmer climate

Liping Zhang

1Atmospheric and Oceanic Science, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA 12NOAA/Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, Princeton, NJ, USA 23University Corporation for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, CO, USA 3

###### Abstract

In this paper, we have evaluated the Southern Ocean (SO) heat flux feedback in a fully coupled model and for the first time examined how this feedback evolves in response to global warming. The model broadly captures the observed characteristics of heat flux feedback over the SO. The heat flux tends to damp SST anomalies over the SO and thus the feedback is negative. In a warmer climate, the negative heat flux feedback in the SO, contributed mainly from turbulent component, becomes stronger. The turbulent feedback in the present day is primarily balanced by the upper boundary that strongly depends on background SST and wind and the thermal adjustment of boundary layer to SST anomalies. It is found that this balance shifts a little bit under global warming scenario. The upper limit increases in a warmer climate due to warm SST responses. The thermal adjustment of boundary layer becomes weaker in a warmer climate because of decreased atmospheric background heat convergence. The mean Deacon Cell transports anomalous heat caused by the greenhouse gas effect northward, leading to a heat convergence along the northern flank of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current. Constrained by the energy, the atmospheric northward heat transport has a corresponding divergence north of 55\({}^{\circ}\)S. This anomalous heat transport divergence favors air heat leaving away from 55\({}^{\circ}\)S-35\({}^{\circ}\)S regions to the polar region, leads to smaller air temperature tendencies in the local compared to the present day and therefore leads to a weakened thermal adjustment of boundary layer. Therefore, both changes in the upper limit and thermal adjustment of boundary layer contribute positively to the enhanced turbulent feedback in a warmer climate. The dynamic component due to changes in wind tends to compensate these two positive contributors, but its magnitude is too small to become a dominant factor.

28 March 2019 / Accepted: 6 September 2019 / Published online: 22 September 2020

1
Footnote 1: Atmospheric and Oceanic Science, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA 12NOAA/Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, Princeton, NJ, USA 23University Corporation for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, CO, USA 3

## 1 Introduction

The energy exchanges between ocean and atmosphere are primarily through surface heat flux. The surface heat flux on one hand contributes to the generation of sea surface temperature (SST) anomalies. On the other hand, it impacts the evolution of SST after it has been produced, therefore acting as a feedback. This feedback denoted as \(\alpha_{net}\) here, is defined as the net surface air-sea heat flux changes in response to a 1 K change of SST. The surface heat flux feedback \(\alpha_{net}\) determines the rate at which SST anomalies are damped to the atmosphere (Hausmann et al., 2016; Liu and Fedorov, 2019), which partly controls the persistence of SST anomalies and the associated potential predictability. The \(\alpha_{net}\) also represents the surface thermal boundary condition for ocean model integrations and is a critical parameter for realistic simulation of ocean's thermohaline circulation (Rahmstorf and Willebrand, 1995). In recent work (Ferreira et al., 2015), the differences of \(\alpha_{net}\) strength are found to impact the transition time of two-time scale SST responses to stratospheric ozone depleting in climate models. Thereby, accurate estimates and understanding of \(\alpha_{net}\) are very necessary to climate community.

In the Northern Hemisphere, observational estimates of \(\alpha_{net}\) are well established (e.g., Frankignoul and Kestenare, 2002; Park et al., 2005). All data show \(\alpha_{net}\) is dominated by the turbulent heat flux feedback (latent plus sensible heat fluxes) that is one order of magnitude larger than the radiative heat flux feedback (long-wave plus short-wave radiations). The \(\alpha_{net}\) varies with location, seasons and spatial scale of SST anomalies. The \(\alpha_{net}\) is substantial over thesubtropical western boundary current regions (Gulf Stream and Kuroshio), with a value of approximate 40 Wm\({}^{-2}\) K\({}^{-1}\). In contrast, observational estimates of \(\alpha_{net}\) are sparse over the Southern Hemisphere, particularly over the Southern Ocean (SO). Hausmann et al (2016, 2017) provided pioneer calculations for the circumpolar SO, suggesting that feedbacks are around 10 Wm\({}^{-2}\) K\({}^{-1}\) over the Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC) region and fall to values as low as 5 Wm\({}^{-2}\) K\({}^{-1}\) near the sea ice margins. They also investigated mechanisms controlling the air-sea heat flux feedback and compared their differences between the North Atlantic and SO. In brief, weak heat flux feedbacks over the SO reflect a regime where there is a large adjustment of the marine atmospheric boundary layer to underlying SST anomalies, while the thermodynamic adjustment is only moderate over the Gulf Stream (Hausmann et al., 2017).

What's the model representation of heat flux feedback \(\alpha_{net}\)? Previous studies have demonstrated that the \(\alpha_{net}\) should be estimated in ocean atmosphere fully coupled simulations, rather than simulation with prescribed SST forcing (Frankignoul and Kestenare, 2002). The prescribed SST forcing overestimates the air-sea contrast at low frequency, if the SST anomalies arise from the internal variability of the atmosphere and have time to adjust to the air temperature fluctuations (Barsugli and Battisti, 1998). Earlier model representations of \(\alpha_{net}\) in the Northern Hemisphere and tropics are very diverse even in the fully coupled climate models. Some models show positive feedback in the North Pacific and North Atlantic Oceans such as the ECHAM3/HOPE (Latif and Barnett, 1994; Grotzner et al., 1998), while others show negative feedback (ECHAM1/LSG Frankignoul et al., 2000; ECHAM3/LSG von Storch, 2000) in the midlatitude oceans and tropical Atlantic. In general, model estimates of \(\alpha_{net}\) are sensitive to model flaws. On the other hand, the SO heat flux feedback has not been investigated in any climate models so far.

In the current paper, we aim to examine the SO heat flux feedback in SPEAR (Seamless system for Prediction and Earth system Research) model, a newly developed fully coupled model at the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL). The SPEAR model has many advantages compared to previous version, such as reduced SST biases over the SO and realistic Antarctic bottom water formations along the continental shelf. We first attempt to compare the modeled SO heat flux feedback in control run with the observation and give a reasonable evaluation. The SO experiences some changes in recent decades: While the Arctic shows rapid warming and sea ice decreasing, the SO exhibits very little warming or even cooling in some places (e.g., Armour et al., 2016); However, there are substantial warming along the northern flank of the ACC in both surface and subsurface ocean. Delayed warming of the SO in response to greenhouse gas forcing is also a ubiquitous feature of comprehensive general circulation model simulations (Marshall et al., 2014). The other goal of our study is to address how the SO heat flux feedback responds to global warming and what the potential mechanisms are.

## 2 Methods, dataset and model

The heat flux feedback \(\alpha_{net}\) is expressed in a general form (e.g. Frankignoul, 1985):

\[\alpha_{net}\equiv\frac{\partial\langle Q^{\prime}\rangle}{\partial T^{\prime} }\Big{|}\overline{\tau} \tag{1}\]

where Q is surface net heat flux (positive upward) and T is SST. Here overbar denotes the seasonal mean background state, prime denotes deviations from the mean (overbars) and \(<\) \(>\) denotes ensemble averaging over many realizations of the same SST anomaly. Positive (negative) values of \(\alpha_{net}\) represent negative (positive) heat flux feedback, since the heat flux response tends to damp (enhance) original SST anomalies. In reality, the \(\alpha_{net}\) shown in (1) is estimated from lagged covariance of heat flux and SST time series (e.g., Frankignoul et al., 1998; Hausmann et al., 2016). The seasonal ENSO signal is removed before analysis by the linear regression. The feedback is then obtained for each month of the year as the covariance of \(Q^{\prime}\) and \(T^{\prime}\) divided by the autocovariance of \(T^{\prime}\)

\[\alpha_{net}=\frac{\overline{T^{\prime}(t)Q^{\prime}(t+1\delta t)}}{\overline{ T^{\prime}(t)T^{\prime}(t+1\delta t)}} \tag{2}\]

where \(\delta t\) is one-month lead time (SST leads heat flux) and t is taken only in certain months of the year. For example, the January (J) feedback is taken from the January (J) and February (F) heat flux response to December (D) and January (J) SST: \(\alpha_{net}=\frac{\overline{T^{\prime}(t)Q^{\prime}(t)}}{\overline{T^{\prime }(t)T^{\prime}(t+1\delta t)}}\)

where \(\delta t\) is one-month lead time (SST leads heat flux) and t is taken only in certain months of the year. For example, the January (J) feedback is taken from the January (J) and February (F) heat flux response to December (D) and January (J) SST: \(\alpha_{net}=\frac{\overline{r^{\prime}(t)Q^{\prime}(t)}}{\overline{r^{\prime }(t)T^{\prime}(t)}}\). We use monthly data here and get the feedback from (2) in each month, and the annual mean feedback is the averaged feedback of twelve months.

The \(\alpha_{net}\) contains radiative heat flux feedback \(\alpha_{r}\) and turbulent heat flux feedback \(\alpha_{T}\). The sensible (\(\alpha_{s}\)) and latent (\(\alpha_{L}\)) components of turbulent heat flux feedbacks are given by

\[\alpha_{s}\approx\overline{\rho^{\alpha_{t}\alpha^{\prime}C_{s}C_{p}^{\alpha }}}\frac{\partial\langle(T-T^{\alpha})^{\prime}\rangle}{\partial T^{\prime}}+ \overline{\rho^{\alpha}C_{s}C_{p}^{\alpha}}\Big{(}\overline{T}-\overline{T^{ \alpha}}\Big{)}\frac{\partial\langle u^{\alpha^{\prime}}\rangle}{\partial T^{ \prime}} \tag{3}\]

and

\[\alpha_{L}\approx\overline{\rho^{\alpha_{t}\alpha^{\prime}C_{L}}}\frac{ \partial\langle(q_{sat}(T)-q^{\prime})^{\prime}\rangle}{\partial T^{\prime}}+ \overline{\rho^{\alpha}C_{L}L}\Big{(}q_{sat}\Big{(}\overline{T}\Big{)}- \overline{q^{\alpha}}\Big{)}\frac{\partial\langle u^{\alpha^{\prime}}\rangle}{ \partial T^{\prime}}. \tag{4}\]Here, \(\rho^{a}\), \(u^{a}\),\(T^{a}\),\(q^{a}\), \(C_{p}^{a}\) are the density, wind speed, temperature, specific humidity, specific heat capacity of the surface atmosphere, \(C_{s}\) and \(C_{L}\) are non-dimensional transfer coefficients for sensible and latent heat flux respectively, \(L\)

is the latent heat of evaporation, and \(q_{sat}(T)\) is the saturated specific humidity at the temperature of sea surface. The first terms on the right side of (3) and (4) are associated with thermodynamic temperature and humidity adjustments, while the second terms are associated with wind adjustment and thus are dynamic components of turbulent heat flux \(\mathrm{f}\)

\(\alpha_{dyn}=\frac{\mathrm{e}}{\rho^{a}C_{s}C_{p}^{a}}\bigg{(}\overline{T}- \overline{T^{a}}\bigg{)}\frac{\mathrm{d}(\rho^{a})}{\delta T^{a}}+\frac{\mathrm{ b}}{\rho^{a}C_{L}L}\bigg{(}q_{sat}\bigg{(}\overline{T}\bigg{)}-\overline{q^{a}} \bigg{)}\frac{\mathrm{d}(\rho^{a})}{\delta T^{a}}\). Following Hausmann et al (2017), the \(q_{sat}\) in (4) can be further expanded through Taylor expansions: \(q_{sat}^{\prime}(T)\approx\frac{q_{sat}}{dT}\big{|}_{\overline{T}}T^{\prime}\) and \(q_{sat}^{\prime}(T^{\prime})\approx\frac{dq_{sat}}{dT}\big{|}_{\overline{T}} T^{\prime}\). Also introducing the relative humidity \(r_{H}=q^{\overline{a}}/q_{sat}(T^{a})\), the turbulent heat flux feedback \(\mathbf{\alpha}_{T}\) is expressed as:

\[\begin{split}\mathbf{\alpha}_{T}&=\alpha_{s}+\alpha_{L} \approx\overline{\rho^{a}u^{a}}\bigg{(}\overline{C_{s}C_{p}^{a}}+\overline{C_{ L}L}\frac{dq_{sat}}{dT}\big{|}_{\overline{T}}\bigg{)}\\ &\quad\quad-\bigg{(}\overline{\rho^{a}u^{a}C_{s}C_{p}^{a}}+ \overline{\rho^{a}u^{a}C_{L}L_{H}}\frac{dq_{sat}}{dT}\big{|}_{\overline{T}^{ \prime}}\bigg{)}\frac{\partial(T^{a})^{\prime}}{\partial T^{\prime}}\\ &\quad\quad-\overline{\rho^{a}u^{a}C_{L}L}q_{sat}\bigg{(}\overline {T^{a}}\bigg{)}\frac{\partial\big{\langle}r_{H}^{\prime}\big{\rangle}}{ \partial T^{\prime}}+\alpha_{dyn}+\alpha_{res}\end{split} \tag{5}\]

In (5), the first term on the right side is fully constrained by the climatological air-sea states such as the surface wind speed and SST. It represents an upper limit of \(\alpha_{T}\), because the assumptions here are there are no obvious air temperature, moisture and wind speed adjustments in response to an SST anomaly (\(\frac{\partial(T^{\prime a})}{\partial T^{\prime}}\) = 0; \(\frac{\partial(r_{H}^{\prime a})}{\partial T^{\prime}}\) = 0; \(\frac{\partial(\omega^{\prime a})}{\partial T}\) = 0). We denote this upper boundary as \(\alpha_{upper}=\overline{\rho^{a}u^{a}}\bigg{(}\overline{C_{s}C_{p}^{a}}+ \overline{C_{L}L}\frac{dq_{sat}}{dT}\big{|}_{\overline{T}}\bigg{)}\). Note that this upper boundary magnitude will change as the background climatological wind and SST vary (e.g., global warming scenario). The second and third terms on the right side represent contributions from thermal adjustment \(\mathbf{\alpha}_{therm}=-\bigg{(}\overline{\rho^{a}u^{a}C_{s}C_{p}^{a}}+\overline{ \rho^{a}u^{a}C_{L}L_{H}}\frac{dq_{sat}}{dT}\big{|}_{\overline{T}^{\prime a}} \bigg{)}\frac{\partial(T^{a})}{\partial T^{\prime}}\) and relative humidity adjustment \(\alpha_{hum}=-\overline{\rho^{a}u^{a}C_{L}L}q_{sat}\bigg{(}\overline{T^{a}} \bigg{)}\frac{\partial(r_{H}^{\prime a})}{\partial T^{\prime}}\), respectively. The last term in (5) denotes the residual term, which includes the high order term of Taylor expansion, nonlinear term and discrete errors. The estimations of \(\frac{\partial(T^{\prime a})}{\partial T^{\prime}}\), \(\frac{\partial(r_{H}^{\prime a})}{\partial T^{\prime}}\) and \(\frac{\partial(r^{\prime a})}{\partial T^{\prime}}\) also use lagged covariance method shown in (2) but replace Q with variables \(T^{a}\), \(r_{H}\) and \(u^{a}\).

The observed heat flux data used in the present study is the monthly objectively analyzed Flux data (OAFlux) from Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (Yu et al., 2008). The OAFlux data has 1\({}^{\circ}\)\(\times\)1\({}^{\circ}\) grid, which applies bulk formulas to daily objectively analyzed air-sea state variables and merges satellite data with three atmospheric reanalyses. We use the time period from year 1985 to 2009 when the radiative heat flux, turbulent heat flux and SST datasets are all available. To avoid the possibility of sea ice contamination to surface heat fluxes, the OAFlux data is only available in the ice-free ocean regions.

The SPEAR model we used in the present study is SPEAR_c192, in which the atmosphere and land components have relatively high resolutions 0.5\({}^{\circ}\). The ocean and sea ice components are based on the new MOM6 code and have a horizontal resolution of approximately 1\({}^{\circ}\) in the sub-topics, approximately 0.5\({}^{\circ}\) in high latitudes and 0.3\({}^{\circ}\) in the deep tropics. The ocean model has 75 layers in the vertical, with refined resolution (2 m) near the surface. The sea ice component in SPEAR_c192 is Sea Ice Simulator (SIS2). SIS2 is a dynamical model with three vertical layers, one snow and two ice, and five ice thickness categories. The MOM6 code can be downloaded from [https://github.com/NOAA-GFDL/MOM6-examples](https://github.com/NOAA-GFDL/MOM6-examples).

We conduct a 500-year control simulation of SPEAR_MED (Delworth et al., 2020), with atmospheric composition fixed at preindustrial concentrations. We use the last 25-years of control simulation to get heat flux feedback coefficient to make sure the time length is exactly the same as the OAFlux. We also test the sensitivity of heat flux feedback on the time length of data. We find that the spatial pattern and magnitude of heat flux feedback are very similar when using 25-, 40- and 50-years data length (not shown). We also perform a double CO\({}_{2}\) experiment to simulate a warmer climate, in which atmosphere CO\({}_{2}\) concentration is suddenly doubled from a preindustrial value. This simulation starts from an arbitrary point in the control run and continues for 300 years. This double CO\({}_{2}\) experiment is called 2CO\({}_{2}\).

## 3 Evaluation of the SO heat flux feedback in model control run

We show in Fig. 1 the SO feedback of air-sea heat fluxes on SST anomalies estimated from OAFlux and SPEAR model control run using Eq. (2), respectively. The turbulent and radiative feedbacks are shown in the upper four panels. In OAFlux, the turbulent feedback has a strong latitudinal dependence, with large values in the mid-latitude (\(\sim\) 20-30 Wm\({}^{-2}\) K\({}^{-1}\)) that gradually decay to 5 Wm\({}^{-2}\) K\({}^{-1}\) around the polar sea ice edge (Fig. 1a). The low values (\(\sim\) 5 Wm\({}^{-2}\) K\({}^{-1}\)) are primarily located in the Antarctic circumpolar current (ACC) region that is well bounded by the climatological October 5.5 \({}^{\circ}\)C and \(-\) 1 \({}^{\circ}\)C isotherms (Fig. 1a). The large values in the mid-latitude peak in strong boundary current regions and their extensions, such as the Agulhas current (Fig. 1a). These features in OAFlux are consistent with previous studies using ERA-Interim and NCEP reanalysis (Hausmann et al., 2016; Franklin et al., 2004) and are well captured by our model (Fig. 1e). However, the spatial pattern of turbulent feedback is smoother in model than that in Figure 1: The Southern Ocean (SO) heat flux feedback strength (colors, unit is Wm\({}^{-2}\) K\({}^{-1}\)) estimated from OAFlux (**a–d**) and SPEAR_MED model (**e–h**) using Eq. (2). Shown are the turbulent heat flux feedbacks (**a**, **e**), radiative heat flux feedbacks (**b**, **f**), latent heat flux feedbacks (**c**, **g**) and sensible heat flux feedbacks (**d**, **h**). The overlapping red contours denote the October \(-\) 1 \({}^{\circ}\)C, 5.5 \({}^{\circ}\)C, 11 \({}^{\circ}\)C and 16.5 \({}^{\circ}\)C climatological SST isotherms. The blue contour denotes the climatological 15% sea ice concentration in October

observation (Fig. 1a versus Fig. 1e), probably due to limited spatial and time resolutions of model. Moreover, the lowest (highest) values around the ACC region (mid-latitude) in model are not as low (high) as that in observation (Fig. 1a versus Fig. 1e). Compared to turbulent feedback, the radiative feedback strength is very small in both observation and model (Fig. 1b, f). In the entire SO, the radiative feedback is around 5 Wm\({}^{-2}\) K\({}^{-1}\) or even less (Fig. 1b, f). Thus, the net heat flux feedback is dominated by turbulent component. The broad positive values of feedback indicate the net heat flux feedback over the SO is negative: the heat flux response tends to damp original SST anomalies.

We further decompose the turbulent heat flux feedback into the latent and sensible components, as displayed in Fig. 1c, d, g, h. Obviously, the turbulent feedback strength mainly arises from latent heat flux feedback in both OAFlux and model, while the contribution from sensible feedback is very small (rarely exceeds 5 Wm\({}^{-2}\) K\({}^{-1}\)). The latitudinal dependence of turbulent feedback is also from the latent feedback. The sensible feedback partly contributes to the peak values around the ACC and Agulhas return current regions (Fig. 1c, d, g, h). Actually, the latent feedback and sensible feedback themselves are strongly correlated. Figure 2 displays a clear proportionality between sensible and latent feedbacks. In general, a warm SST background corresponds to a low Bowen ratio \(r=\alpha_{S}/\alpha_{L}\)(e.g., Ohmura, 1982) and vice versa. This relationship is established in both the OAFlux and model (Fig. 2a, b). Compared to OAFlux, the modeled Bowen ratio has smaller spreads. In mid-latitudes and poleward western boundary current regions (temperature exceeds 10 \({}^{\circ}\)C), the feedback ratio in model exactly lies between 1/2 and 1/10 (Fig. 2b). The ratio in OAFlux, however, can be lower than 1/10 and higher than 1/2, although most of them still lie within the range (1/2-1/10) (Fig. 2a). Over the cold ACC region (temperature is lower than 6 \({}^{\circ}\)C), the ratio is larger than 1/2 and the sensible component becomes significant to the turbulent feedback (Fig. 2). In model, all grids over the ACC region have a ratio equals to or smaller than 1 (Fig. 2b). Again, the OAFlux range is large and some grids over the ACC region can exceed ratio 1 that indicates the sensible component contributes more to the turbulent feedback than the latent component. In Fig. 2, we can also clearly see the extreme values of latent and sensible feedbacks in OAFlux are higher than that in model, consistent with the larger range of feedbacks shown in Fig. 1. The latent and sensible feedbacks are further separated into dynamic and thermodynamic components (see Eqs. 3 and 4) (Fig. 3). Both latent and sensible feedbacks in model and observation are dominated by the thermodynamic components, while the dynamic components play much small and negative roles. The dynamic components show negative values in most of the SO regions, implying a positive heat flux feedback. Further examination reveals that this positive feedback is largely associated with negative values of \(\frac{\partial(\mu^{2})}{\partial T}\) (not shown). This is because the SST warming anomalies over the SO decrease meridional temperature gradient and thus the lower tropospheric baroclinicity in the region of maximum eddy growth. The decreased transient eddy heat flux and transient eddy feedback eventually lead a weakening of westerly (Zhang and Delworth, 2016; Zhang et al., 2019). The weakened westerly can amplify the initial warming through reduced latent heat loss and anomalous southward Ekman warm advection, thereby acting as a positive feedback. Overall, the model reasonably reproduces the SO heat flux feedback characteristics in OAFlux, albeit with some magnitude and spread differences. Even in OAFlux,

Figure 2: Scatterplot of sensible feedback (Wm\({}^{-2}\) K\({}^{-1}\)) versus latent feedback (Wm\({}^{-2}\) K\({}^{-1}\)) in **a** OAFlux and **b** SPEAR_MED. The colors denote climatological October SST (\({}^{\circ}\)C). The lines denote a ratio sensible feedback divided by latent feedback (\(\alpha_{s}/\alpha_{L}\)) equals to 1, 1/2, 1/10 and 0 from top to bottom

Figure 3: Thermodynamic and dynamic components of latent feedback (**a**, **b**) and sensible feedback (**c**, **d**) estimated from OAFlux. **e–h** same as **a–d** but estimated from the SPEAR. MED model. Unit is Wm\({}^{-2}\) K\({}^{-1}\). The overlapping red contours denote the October \(-1\)\({}^{\circ}\)C, \(5.5\)\({}^{\circ}\)C, \(11\)\({}^{\circ}\)C and \(16.5\)\({}^{\circ}\)C climatological SST isotherms. The blue contour denotes the climatological \(15\%\)sea ice concentration in October

the uncertainties of heat flux feedback remain exist, given the limited observations over the SO.

## 4 SO heat flux feedback changes in a warmer climate

To highlight the SO heat flux feedback response to global warming, we plot 50-years running mean feedback time series in 2CO2 experiment (Fig. 4). When using Eq. (2) to calculate running mean feedback coefficients, the overbar is obtained as the seasonal mean state in every running mean background 50 years and prime means departure from the background seasonal mean state within these 50 years. Again, the positive trend of feedback coefficient shown in Fig. 4 is not sensitive to the running mean length (the results are quite similar when using 25-, 40- or 50-years running means, not shown). As the CO2 concentration is doubled, the feedback strength averaged in the entire SO gradually strengthens, including both radiative and turbulent components (Fig. 4a, b). The strongest increase appears during the 50-100 years, then is followed by a slow enhancement. The radiative feedback is further decomposed into longwave and shortwave components. In a warmer climate, the longwave feedback enhances (Fig. 5a), while the shortwave feedback becomes more negative (Fig. 5b). This implies that the same warm SST anomaly can induce larger upward long wave and larger downward shortwave radiations in a warmer climate than in present day. We find that these changes are closely related to clouds response, particularly the low cloud amount (Fig. 5c, d). In a warmer climate, the broad SST warming along the northern branch of ACC (Fig. 9a) decreases the low-level atmospheric stability, which disfavors the production of low clouds (Woods and Bretherton, 2006) (Fig. 5d). Although climate models show large cloud biases in the mean state over the SO (e.g., Haynes et al., 2011; Naud et al., 2013), this low cloud response to global warming is consistent with our physical understanding (e.g., Wood and Bretherton, 2006). The decreased low cloud amount in a warmer climate leads to an increasing of outgoing longwave radiation and an increasing of downward shortwave radiation as a result of reductions of cloud reflection.

Figure 4: The 50-years running mean a radiative and \(\mathbf{b}\) turbulent feedback (Wm\({}^{-2}\) K\({}^{-1}\)) time series averaged over the entire ice-free Southern Ocean (south of 35\({}^{\circ}\)S) in 2CO2 experiment. The green and pink lines in b are the dynamic and thermodynamic components of turbulent feedback

We note that the radiative feedback response is one order of magnitude smaller than the turbulent feedback, thus the latter plays a dominant role in the net heat flux feedback response (Fig. 4a, b). The positive increase indicates the heat flux damping effect (negative heat flux feedback) over the SO becomes stronger and stronger in a warmer climate. Moreover, this positive increase is dominated by the thermodynamic component, whereas the dynamic component plays a weak compensation effect (Fig. 4b). We also show in Fig. 6 the spatial pattern of turbulent feedback evolutions in a warmer climate. At 1-50 years, the feedback strength is similar to that in the control run, with - 5 Wm\({}^{-2}\) K\({}^{-1}\) averaged in the ACC region and - 15 Wm\({}^{-2}\) K\({}^{-1}\) averaged in the midlatitudes. At 71-120 and 101-150 years, the increase of feedback strength is very obvious and almost everywhere. Consistent with the time series (Fig. 4b), the increase of feedback strength becomes much weaker after 100 years. At the end of 50 years (251-300), the feedback strength increases by about 1.4 times compared to the first 50 years. What's the physical processes determine these turbulent heat flux feedback changes? In the next subsection, we will address this question.

## 5 Mechanisms

We conduct closed budgets for the turbulent feedback (\(\alpha_{T}\)) in the first and last 50 years of 2CO\({}_{2}\) run using Eq. (5), respectively (Fig. 7). The \(\alpha_{T}\) is separated into contributions from upper boundary \(\alpha_{upper}\), thermal adjustment \(\alpha_{therm}\), relative humidity adjustment \(\alpha_{rhm}\), dynamical adjustment \(\alpha_{dyn}\) and residual term \(\alpha_{res}\). In the first 50 years, the \(\alpha_{T}\) is mainly balanced by two large terms: the \(\alpha_{upper}\) and \(\alpha_{therm}\) terms (Fig. 7a-c). The Eq. (5) clearly shows that both background wind speed (\(\overline{u^{a}}\)) and SST (\(\overline{T}\)) control the spatial structure of \(\alpha_{upper}\). The slow increasing of \(\alpha_{upper}\) magnitude away from the pole in the SO obviously reflects the impact of mean SST. The influence of background wind plays a secondary role. The \(\alpha_{upper}\) has large values over the entire SO (\(>\) 20 Wm\({}^{-2}\) K\({}^{-1}\)), which provides an upper limit for the \(\alpha_{T}\) (Fig. 7b). The actual \(\alpha_{T}\) is much smaller than the \(\alpha_{upper}\) (Fig. 7a, b), mainly due to compensation effect from the thermal adjustment \(\alpha_{therm}\) (Fig. 7c). The \(\alpha_{therm}\) is characterized by broad negative values in the SO, with the largest amplitude around the ACC region (Fig. 7c). This strong thermal adjustment corresponds to large positive

Figure 5: The 50-years running mean time series of **a** longwave, **b** shortwave radiation feedback strength, total cloud amount and low cloud amount averaged over the entire ice free Southern Ocean (south of 35\({}^{\circ}\)S) in 2CO\({}_{2}\) experiment. Units are Wm\({}^{-2}\) K\({}^{-1}\) for radiation feedback and % for cloud amounts

values of \(\frac{\partial(T^{\prime\prime})}{\partial T^{\prime}}\) (Fig. 8a). The \(\frac{\partial(T^{\prime\prime})}{\partial T^{\prime}}\) approximately equals to 1 around the sea ice edge and ACC regions (Fig. 8a). It decreases somehow in the mid-latitudes, but still exceeds 0.75 in most regions. This suggests that the atmosphere export of air temperature anomalies is very slow over these regions. If the atmosphere efficiently exports any air temperature anomaly induced by SST changes, the \(\frac{\partial(T^{\prime\prime})}{\partial T^{\prime}}\) should be close to zero. The inefficiency of atmosphere export here is hypothesized to be related to the background heat

Figure 6: The spatial pattern of turbulent feedback strength (Wm\({}^{-2}\) K\({}^{-1}\)) evolutions in the years 1–50, 41–90, 71–120, 101–150, 131–180, 171–220, 201–250, 231–280 and 251–300 in 2CO\({}_{2}\) experiment. The overlapping red contours denote the October – 1 °C, 5.5 °C, 11 °C and 16.5 °C climatological SST isotherms

Figure 7: The closed turbulent feedback budgets (unit is \(\mathrm{Wm}^{-2}\) K\({}^{-1}\)) in the \(\mathbf{a}\)-\(\mathbf{f}\) first (1–50 years) and \(\mathbf{g}\)-\(\mathbf{l}\) last (251–300 years) 50 years of the 2CO\({}_{2}\) run and \(\mathbf{m}\)-\(\mathbf{r}\) their differences (251–300 years to 1–50 years). The first row denotes the turbulent feedback strengths (\(\mathbf{a}\), \(\mathbf{g}\)) and their changes in a warm climate (\(\mathbf{m}\)). The second to sixth rows denote the feedback contributions from upper limit \(\alpha_{upper}\), thermal adjustment \(\alpha_{therm}\), relative humidity adjustment \(\alpha_{therm}\), dynamical adjustment \(\alpha_{dyn}\) and residual term \(\alpha_{ave}\), respectively. The overlapping red contours denote the October – 1 °C, 5.5 °C, 11 °C and 16.5 °C climatological SST isotherms

convergence in the subpolar region. As shown in Fig. 9c, the total energy transport in the Southern Hemisphere is dominated by the atmosphere heat transport (AHT), which converges heat toward subpolar region (south of 40\({}^{\circ}\)S). The background heat convergence disfavors the removal of air temperature anomalies from there.

The contributions of other three terms: relative humidity adjustment \(\alpha_{rhm}\), dynamical adjustment \(\alpha_{dyn}\) and residual term \(\alpha_{res}\) to the turbulent feedback \(\alpha_{T}\) are small (Fig. 7d-f). The \(\alpha_{rhm}\) has a slightly positive contribution to the \(\alpha_{T}\), with a magnitude less than 4 Wm\({}^{-2}\) K\({}^{-1}\) in the entire SO (Fig. 7d). The broad positive values of \(\alpha_{rhm}\) correspond to negative signs of relative humidity sensitivity to SST change \(\left(\frac{\partial\left\langle\tau_{rhm}^{\prime}\right\rangle}{\partial T^{ \prime}}\right)\) (Fig. 8b). In the ACC region, the \(\frac{\partial\left\langle\tau_{rhm}^{\prime}\right\rangle}{\partial T^{ \prime}}\) is approximately \(-\) 1%/K. The physical understanding is: a warm SST anomaly leads to an increase of saturated humidity, and thereby a decrease of relative humidity if the water vapor content near the surface doesn't change too much (e.g., Laine et al., 2014). The magnitude of dynamical contribution \(\alpha_{dyn}\) to \(\alpha_{T}\) is also small and the associated spatial pattern is nonuniform (Fig. 7e). In general, the \(\alpha_{dyn}\) contributes positively to \(\alpha_{T}\) in the western hemisphere and contributes negatively in the eastern hemisphere. Further inspection reveals that the spatial pattern of \(\alpha_{dyn}\) primarily arises from wind speed sensitivity \(\frac{\partial\left\langle\alpha^{\prime\prime}\right\rangle}{\partial T^{ \prime}}\) (Fig. 8c). Although the spatial patterns of \(\alpha_{dyn}\) and \(\frac{\partial\left\langle\alpha^{\prime\prime}\right\rangle}{\partial T^{ \prime}}\) are ununiform, the zonal mean or area mean results are dominated by negative signs (now shown) over the SO. This means the wind speed overall decreases over the SO as the local SST warms and vice versa. This hypothesis is consistent with our previous sensitivity experiments (Zhang and Delworth, 2016; Zhang et al., 2019), in which we prescribed an idealized warm SST anomaly in the SO and the atmosphere response is characterized by a weakening of westerly and thus a decrease of wind speed in the SO. Similar to \(\alpha_{rhm}\) and \(\alpha_{dyn}\), the residual term \(\alpha_{res}\) only slightly contributes to turbulent feedback \(\alpha_{T}\) (Fig. 7f).

In a warmer climate (last 50 years of 2CO\({}_{2}\) run), the turbulent feedback \(\alpha_{T}\) is still controlled by two dominant terms \(\alpha_{upper}\) and \(\alpha_{therm}\), while the rest terms play much smaller roles (Fig. 7g-l). To highlight the \(\alpha_{T}\) response to global warming, we conduct differences of \(\alpha_{T}\) and all budget terms between the last and the first 50 years of 2CO\({}_{2}\) run (Fig. 7m-r). As mentioned in Figs. 4 and 6, the \(\alpha_{T}\) becomes larger in the last 50 years, except in the north edge of Ross and Amundsen-Bellingshausen Seas (Fig. 7m). A close examination finds that the upper limit \(\alpha_{upper}\) overall increases in a warmer climate (Fig. 7n). This is not surprising, since the \(\alpha_{upper}\)

Figure 8: **a** Thermal adjustment (\(\frac{\partial\left\langle\tau_{rhm}^{\prime}\right\rangle}{\partial T^{ \prime}}\), K/K), **b** relative humidity adjustment (\(\frac{\partial\left\langle\alpha_{res}^{\prime}\right\rangle}{\partial T^{ \prime}}\), 1/K) and **c** dynamical adjustment (\(\frac{\partial\left\langle\alpha_{T}^{\prime}\right\rangle}{\partial T^{ \prime}}\), m/s/K) of the surface atmosphere to perturbations in SST in the first 50 years of 2CO\({}_{2}\) experiment. **d–f** Same as **a–c** but for the last 50 years (251–300) of 2CO\({}_{2}\) experiment. **g-l** Differences of thermal, relative humidity and dynamical adjustments between the last 50 years and the first 50 years (year 251–300)–(year 1–50) in 2CO\({}_{2}\) experiment. **j–l** The percentage change of these differences (100%). The overlapping red contours denote the October –

is strongly associated with the background SST field. In a warmer climate, the SST warms almost everywhere in the ice-free area south of 30\({}^{\circ}\)S (Fig. 9a). The largest positive anomalies of \(\alpha_{upper}\) coincide well with the warmest SST in the SO (Fig. 7n versus Fig. 9a). The \(\alpha_{upper}\) accounts for approximately 50% of the \(\alpha_{T}\) increase over the ACC region (Fig. 7m versus Fig. 7n).

The \(\alpha_{T}\) response is also largely attributed to changes in the thermal adjustment \(\alpha_{therm}\). The spatial patterns of \(\alpha_{T}\) change and \(\alpha_{therm}\) response have great similarities (Fig. 7m versus Fig. 7o), and their spatial correlation is 0.9. The \(\alpha_{therm}\) change accounts for half of the \(\alpha_{T}\) response in magnitude. A close examination reveals that the \(\alpha_{therm}\) response is largely due to changes in term \(\frac{\partial(T^{\prime\prime})}{\partial T}\) (Fig. 8a, d, g). In a warmer climate, the \(\frac{\partial(T^{\prime\prime})}{\partial T}\) decreases by about 50% in the SO (Fig. 8a, b). It indicates that the atmospheric air temperature response to local SST change is much smaller under global warming scenario. This low sensitivity is largely associated with changes in background atmospheric heat transport (AHT) convergence. As revealed by previous studies, the anomalous meridional AHT in response to global warming is constrained by energetics and closely mirrors the ocean heat transport anomaly (e.g., Armour et al., 2019). In a warmer climate, the global ocean overall warms due to greenhouse gas effect. However, the ocean warming is not uniform in space. The warming has a large amplitude along the northern flank of the ACC, whereas the ocean shows little warming or even cooling south of the ACC (Fig. 9a). This meridional difference is primarily associated with the background ocean cell (e.g. Armour et al., 2016), while the ocean circulation change plays positive but much smaller roles (Liu et al., 2018). The SO permanent wind driven upwelling damps warming around the Antarctic; the associated Deacon cell transports heat northward, leading to a heat convergence and subsurface warming along the north branch of the ACC (Fig. 9b, d). The weakening of Antarctic Bottom water (AABW) formation as a result of sea ice melting and

Figure 9: **a** SO SST difference between the last 50 years (251–300) and the first 50 years (1–50) of 2CO\({}_{2}\) experiment. **b** Same as (a) but for the zonal mean (0\({}^{\circ}\)–360\({}^{\circ}\)E) temperature profiles. **c** Northward heat transports (ocean: blue line; atmosphere: red line; total: black line) in the first 50 years (1–50) of 2CO\({}_{2}\) experiment. The northward oceanic

excessive precipitation in a warmer climate (e.g. de Lavergne et al., 2014) further amplify the less warmed SST around the Antarctic. The anomalous ocean heat transport convergence corresponds to a divergence of AHT north of 55\({}^{\circ}\)S (Fig. 9d). Previous studies (e.g., Hwang and Fraerson; Armour et al., 2019) also suggested that this poleward AHT change in a warmer climate is largely due to large-scale meridional diffusion of moisture static energy (MSE) (Fig. 10a). We can see a clear increase of meridional MSE gradient in a warmer climate due to huge increase of moisture in the tropics (Fig. 10a). The atmospheric divergent circulation also contributes positively (divergence around 55\({}^{\circ}\)S-35\({}^{\circ}\)S) but is not a dominant factor (Fig. 10b). This anomalous AHT divergence favors air heat leaving away from 55\({}^{\circ}\)S-35\({}^{\circ}\)S regions to the polar region in a warmer climate (polar amplification), leads to smaller Ta tendencies in the local compared to control run, and therefore induces a small value of local air temperature Ta response to the same SST anomaly \(\left(\frac{\partial(T^{\varphi})}{\partial T}\right)\) (Fig. 8g) and therefore a weakened thermal adjustment \(\alpha_{therm}\) (Fig. 70).

Compared to the upper limit \(\alpha_{upper}\) and thermal adjustment \(\alpha_{therm}\), the contributions of other three terms to \(\alpha_{T}\) change are relatively small (Fig. 7p-r). However, the relative humidity \(\alpha_{rim}\) and dynamical adjustments \(\alpha_{dyn}\) still contribute positively to the \(\alpha_{T}\) change, particularly in the north of the ACC (Fig. 7p, q). Moreover, the percentage changes of \(\frac{\partial(T^{\varphi}_{dyn})}{\partial T^{\varphi}}\) and \(\frac{\partial(T^{\varphi})}{\partial T^{\varphi}}\) are even larger than that of \(\frac{\partial(T^{\varphi})}{\partial T^{\varphi}}\) (Fig. 8j-l). The strong SST warming along the north branch of the ACC in a warmer climate (Fig. 9a) leads to a rapid increase of saturated specific humidity. The sensitivity of relative humidity to SST change becomes large and a small SST change can trigger a huge decrease of relative humidity. Accordingly, the \(\frac{\partial(T^{\varphi}_{dyn})}{\partial T^{\varphi}}\) becomes more negative in the north of the ACC (Fig. 8b, e), which corresponds to a positive change of \(\alpha_{rim}\) in a warmer climate (Fig. 7p). On the other hand, the wind speed sensitivity to SST change \(\left(\frac{\partial(\alpha^{\varphi})}{\partial T^{\varphi}}\right)\) shows overall negative signs in the SO in a warmer climate (Fig. 8f). Compared to the first 50 years, the decreased wind speed response shifts more poleward (Fig. 8e, f), probably due to the background wind shift (e.g. Kushner et al., 2001). This leads to an overall increase (decrease) of wind speed sensitivity \(\left(\frac{\partial(\alpha^{\varphi})}{\partial T^{\varphi}}\right)\) (Fig. 8i) and thus positive (negative) dynamical adjustment \(\alpha_{dyn}\) (Fig. 7q) in the north (south) of the ACC.

## 6 Discussion and summary

In this paper, we have evaluated the SO heat flux feedback in a fully coupled SPEAR model and for the first time examined how this feedback evolves in response to global warming. The SPEAR model broadly captures the observed characteristics of heat flux feedback over the SO (Fig. 1). In general, the heat flux tends to damp SST anomalies over the SO and thus the feedback is negative. The damping rate varies from approximately 20-30 Wm\({}^{-2}\) K\({}^{-1}\) in the mid-latitude to approximately 5-10 Wm\({}^{-2}\) K\({}^{-1}\) in the subpolar ACC regions. The heat flux feedback is dominated by turbulent component, especially it's thermodynamic component, with the radiative component playing much less roles.

In a warmer climate, the negative heat flux feedback in the SO becomes stronger, including both turbulent and radiative components (Fig. 4). The turbulent feedback strength in the present day is primarily balanced by the upper limit that strongly depends on background SST (positive contribution) and the thermal adjustment of boundary layer to SST anomalies (negative contribution) (Fig. 7a-f). We find that this balance shifts a little bit under global warming scenario (Fig. 7g-l). The upper limit increases in a warmer climate

Figure 10: Shown are the zonal mean moisture static energy (MSE) and meridional wind differences between the last 50 years and the first 50 years of 2CO\({}_{2}\) run. Units are kJ/kg for the MSE and m/s for the wind

due to warm SST responses. The thermal adjustment of boundary layer to SST anomalies becomes weaker in a warmer climate because of decreased background heat convergence in the SO. The SO experiences a ununiform warming in response to global warming, with delayed warming south of the ACC and enhanced warming to the north (Fig. 9a, b). This meridional difference is primarily associated with the mean SO meridional overturning circulation. The mean Deacon Cell transports anomalous heat northward and thus leads to heat convergence along the northern flank of the ACC. Accordingly, the atmospheric northward heat transport has a divergence north of 57\({}^{\circ}\)S due to conservation of energy (Bjerkres compensation, Yang et al., 2016). This anomalous heat transport divergence favors heat leaving away from 55\({}^{\circ}\)S-35\({}^{\circ}\)S to polar region in a warmer climate (polar amplification), leads to smaller Ta tendencies in the local compared to control run, and therefore induces a small value of local air temperature Ta response to the same SST anomaly \(\left(\frac{\partial(T^{\prime})}{\partial T^{\prime}}\right)\) and therefore a weakened thermal adjustment of boundary layer. Albeit with a small magnitude, the relative humidity and dynamical adjustments also contribute positively to the turbulent feedback change in the north of the ACC.

The strength of negative radiative feedback also enhances in a warmer climate (Fig. 4a). The broad SST warming along the northern branch of the ACC decreases the low-level atmospheric stability, which eventually prevents low clouds production (Fig. 5c, d). For the same SST perturbation, the decreasing low cloud amounts reduce cloud reflections and thus lead to an increased upward long wave radiation and an increased downward shortwave radiation (Fig. 5a, b). The former is much stronger than the latter in our 2CO\({}_{2}\) experiment. Thereby, the total effect is the upward radiation increases more in response to a one-degree change of SST in a warmer climate than in present day, which corresponds to an enhanced negative radiative feedback.

We also roughly assess the air-sea damping time scale of SST anomalies (\(\tau=\rho_{0}c_{p}\ \bar{h}\ /\alpha\)) over the SO. In addition to the heat flux feedback \(\alpha\), the damping time scale \(\tau\) strongly depends on the thermal inertia of the well mixed surface layer \(\rho_{0}c_{p}\ h\ (\rho_{0}\) is sea water density,\(c_{p}\) is specific heat of sea water and \(h\) is mixed layer depth). We show in Fig. 11 the seasonal net heat flux feedback, mixed layer depth (MLD), and air-sea damping time scale averaged in the SO in the first and last 50 years of the 2CO\({}_{2}\) experiment. The enhanced heat flux feedback strength in a warmer climate is clearly seen throughout the whole seasons (Fig. 11a). The increased magnitude in the cold seasons (AMJJAS) is larger than that in the warm seasons (ONDJFM), presumably due to large wind and air-sea temperature contrasts in winter. On the other hand, the area mean MLD exerts moderate changes in a warm climate (Fig. 11b). Further examination finds that the MLD change is ununiform in spatial (not shown). A number of factors contribute to the MLD response, including ocean stratification, wind strength, general circulation changes and so on. The cancelation of different factors and regions eventually leads to moderate changes in area mean MLD in the SO. Although the MLD change is small, the seasonality of \(\tau\) is strongly moderated by the seasonal cycle of MLD (Fig. 11c). The strongest \(\tau\) and its change peak in late winter (ASO) when the MLD deepens. The damping time scale \(\tau\) decreases by almost 40% in a warmer climate during the peak seasons. If we don't take other factors (e.g. advection, mixing) into consideration, the SO SST would become more difficult to predict in a warmer climate than in the present day due to reduced persistence time scale.

Figure 11: Seasonal **a** net heat flux feedback, **b** mixed layer depth and **c** air-sea damping time scale averaged in the ice-free area south of 35\({}^{\circ}\)S in the first (1–50 years, blue color) and last (251–300 years, yellow color) 50 years of 2CO\({}_{2}\) experiment. Units are Wm\({}^{-2}\) K\({}^{-1}\) for the heat flux feedback, m for the mixed layer depth and months for the air-sea damping time scale

As mentioned in Sect. 5, the strength of turbulent heat flux feedback weakens over the north edge of Ross and Amundsen-Bellingshausen Seas in a warmer climate (Fig. 7m), which is in sharp contrast to enhanced feedback strengths in other regions. Here, we propose that this feedback decrease may be related to the weakening of deep convection over these regions. The weakened convection is clearly seen from the MLD and AABW cell changes (not shown) and consistent with the negative SST anomaly over the Ross Sea (Fig. 9a). To investigate the impact of deep convection on the SO turbulent feedback strength, we conduct composite of SST and turbulent feedback strength differences between the Ross Sea weak convection cases and strong convection cases in preindustrial control run (Fig. 12a, b). The weakened convection produces negative SST anomalies due to suppressed mixing with subsurface warm water (Fig. 12a). The turbulent feedback change shows overall negative anomalies in the Ross and Amundsen-Bellingshausen Seas (Fig. 12b), which is similar to that in a warmer climate (Fig. 7m). Further examination reveals that both the upper limit and thermal adjustment of boundary layer (Fig. 12c, d) contribute positively to the turbulent feedback anomaly (Fig. 12b), with the latter playing a dominant role. The weakening of convection corresponds to negative SST anomalies and heat divergence over the Ross and Amundsen-Bellingshausen Seas. The overlying atmosphere has an anomalous heat transport convergence (not shown), which disfavors the exports of temperature and moisture anomalies to other regions and therefore generates a positive anomaly of \(\frac{\partial(\mathbf{r}^{2})}{\partial\mathbf{r}}\). This eventually leads to an enhanced thermal adjustment of boundary layer that makes turbulent feedback strength become more negative.

We caution that we only use one model here and the ocean component is not an eddy resolving model. Thus, it would be very useful to repeat such analysis with other models to assess the robustness of the results, especially using models with substantially higher ocean resolution. Further study will also benefit from the growing observational record of satellite SST and Argo data that allow us to quantify more robustly the feedback processes on SST originating from the seasonal thermocline.

Figure 12: Composite of **a** SST, **b** turbulent feedback strength, **c** upper limit \(a_{\text{upper}}\) and **d** thermal adjustment \(a_{\text{therm}}\) differences between the weak convection cases and the strong convection cases in the Ross Sea. Units are \({}^{\circ}\)C for SST and Wm\({}^{-2}\) K\({}^{-1}\) for flux feedback and its upper limit and thermal adjustment contributions. The overlapping red contours denote the October \(-1\)\({}^{\circ}\)C and \(5.5\)\({}^{\circ}\)C climatological SST isotherms

## References

* Armour et al. (2016) Armour KC, Marshall J, Scott JR, Donohoe A, Newson ER (2016) Southern Ocean warming delayed by circumpolar upwelling and equatorward transport. Nat Geosci 9:549-554
* Armour et al. (2019) Armour KC, Siler N, Donohoe A, Roe GH (2019) Meridional atmospheric heat transport constrained by energetics and mediated by large-scale diffusion. J Clim 32:3655-3680
* Barsugli and Battisti (1998) Barsugli JJ, Battisti DS (1998) The basic effects of atmosphere-ocean thermal coupling on midlatitude variability. J Atmos Sci 55:477-493
* de Lavergne et al. (2014) de Lavergne C, Paler JB, Galbraith ED, Bernardello R, Marinova I (2014) Cessation of deep convection in the open Southern Ocean under anthropogenic climate change. Nat Clim Change 4:278-282
* Delworth et al. (2020) Delworth TL, Cooke WF, Adcroft A, Bushuk M, Chen J-H, Dunne KA, Ginoux P, Gudgel R, Hallberg RW, Harris L, Harrison MJ, Johnson N, Kagnickel SB, Lin S-J, Lu F, Malyshev S, Milly PC, Murakami H, Naik V, Pascale S, Paytner D, Rosati A, Schwartz MD, Shevliakova E, Underwood S, Wittenberg AT, Xiang B, Yang X, Zeng F, Zhang H, Zhang L, Zhao M (2020) SPEAR: The next generation gfdl modeling system for seasonal to multidecadal prediction and projection. J Adv Model Earth Syst. [https://doi.org/10.1029/2019MS001895](https://doi.org/10.1029/2019MS001895)
* Ferreira et al. (2015) Ferreira D, Marshall J, Bitz CM, Solomon S, Plumb A (2015) Antarctic ocean and sea ice response to ozone depletion: a two timescale problem. J Clim 28:1206-1226
* Fankiignoul (1985) Fankiignoul C (1985) Sea surface temperature anomalies, planetary waves and air-sea feedback in the middle latitudes. Rev Geophys 23:357-390
* Fankiignoul et al. (1998) Fankiignoul C, Czaja A, L'Heveder B (1998) Air-sea feedback in the North Atlantic and surface boundary conditions for ocean models. J Clim 11:2310-2324
* Franklin and Kestenare (2002) Franklin C, Kestenare E (2002) The surface heat flux feedback. Part I: estimates from observations in Atlantic and the North Pacific. Clim Dyn 19:633-647
* Fankiignoul et al. (2000) Fankiignoul C, Kestenare E, Senenchelael N, de Coeilogon G, D'Andrea F (2000) On decadal-scale ocean-atmosphere inter- actions in the extended ECHAM1/LSG climate simulation. Clim Dyn 16:333-354
* Fankiignoul et al. (2004) Fankiignoul C, Kestenare E, Botzet M, Carril AF, Drange H, Pardaens A, Terray L, Sutton R (2004) An intercomparison between the surface heat flux feedback in five coupled models, COADS and the NCEP reanalysis. Clim Dyn 22:373-388
* Grutzer and Latif (1998) Grutzer A, Latif M, Barnett TP (1998) A decadal climate cycle in the North Atlantic ocean as simulated by the ECHO coupled GCM. J Clim 11:831-847
* Hausmann and Czaja and Marshall (2016) Hausmann U, Czaja A, Marshall J (2016) Estimates of air-sea feedbacks on sea surface temperature anomalies in the Southern Ocean. J Clim 29:439-454
* Hausmann et al. (2017) Hausmann U, Czaja A, Marshall J (2017) Mechanisms controlling the SST air-sea heat flux feedback and its dependence on spatial scale. Clim Dyn 48:1297-1307
* Haynes et al. (2011) Haynes JM, Jakob C, Rossow WB, Tselioudis G, Brown J (2011) Major characteristics of Southern Ocean cloud regimes and their effects on the energy budget. J Clim 24:5061-5080
* Hwang and Frierson (2010) Hwang YT, Frierson DMW (2010) Increasing atmospheric poleward energy transport with global warming. Geophys Res Lett 37:L24807. [https://doi.org/10.1029/2010GL045440](https://doi.org/10.1029/2010GL045440)
* Kushner et al. (2001) Kushner PJ, Held IM, Delworth TL (2001) Southern hemisphere atmospheric circulation response to global warming. J Clim 14:2238-2249
* Latif and Barnett (1994) Latif M, Barnett TP (1994) Causes of decadal climate variability in the North Pacific/North American sector. Science 266:634-637
* Laine et al. (2014) Laine A, Nakamura H, Nishii K, Miyasaka T (2014) A diagnostic study of future evaporation changes projected in CMIP5 climate models. Climate Dyn 42:2745-2761
* Liu et al. (2018) Liu W, Lu J, Xie SP, Fedorov A (2018) Southern Ocean heat uptake, redistribution and storage in a warming climate: the role of meridional overturning circulation. J Clim 31:4727-4743
* Liu and Fedorov (2019) Liu W, Fedorov AV (2019) Global impacts of Arctic sea ice loss mediated by the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation. Geophys Res Lett. [https://doi.org/10.1029/2018GL080602](https://doi.org/10.1029/2018GL080602)
* Marshall et al. (2019) Marshall J, Armour K, Scott J, Kostov Y, Hausmann U, Ferreira D, Shepherd T (2019) Bitc Z (2014) The ocean's role in polar climate change: asymmetric Arctic and Antarctic responses to greenhouse gas and ozone forcing. Philos Trans R Soc A Math Phys Eng Sci 372:20130040
* Naud et al. (2014) Naud CM, Booth JF, Del Genio AD (2014) Evaluation of ERA-Interim and MERRA cloudiness in the Southern Ocean. J Clim 27:2109-2124
* Ohmura (1982) Ohmura A (1982) Objective criteria for rejecting data for Bowen ratio flux calculations. J Appl Meteor 21:595-598
* Park and Deser (2005) Park S, Deser C, Alexander MA (2005) Estimation of the surface heat fluxes response to sea surface temperature anomalies over the global oceans. J Clim 18:4582-4599
* Rahmstorf and Willebrand (1995) Rahmstorf S, Willebrand J (1995) The role of temperature feedback in stabilizing the thermohaline circulation. J Phys Oceanogr 25:787-805
* Von Storch (2000) Von Storch JS (2000) Signature of air-sea interactions in a coupled atmosphere-ocean GCM. J Clim 13:3361-3379
* Wood and Bretherton (2006) Wood R, Bretherton, (2006) On the relationship between stratiform low cloud cover and lower-tpospheric stability. J Clim 19:6425-6432
* Yang et al. (2016) Yang H, Zhao Y, Liu Z (2016) Understanding Bjerknes compensation in atmosphere and ocean heat transports using a coupled box model. J Clim 29:2145-2160
* Yu et al. (2008) Yu L, Jin X, Weller RA (2008) Multidecade global flux datasets from the objectively analyzed air-sea fluxes (OAFlux) project: latent and sensible heat fluxes, ocean evaporation, and related surface meteorological variables. Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, OAFlux Project Tech. Rep. OA-2008-01
* Zhang and Delworth (2016) Zhang L, Delworth TL (2016) Impact of the Antarctic bottom water formation on the Weddell Gyre and its northward propagation characteristics in GFDL model. J Geophys Res Oceans 121:5825-5846
* Zhang et al. (2019) Zhang L, Delworth TL, Cooke W, Yang X (2019) Natural variability of Southern Ocean convection as a driver of observed climate trends. Nat Clim Change 9:59-65

## References

* Arment et al. (2016)
